### **The CIA Triad**
1. Confidentiality:
   - Protection of sensitive data fro unauthorized access.
   - Ensure data is only accessible to those with proper authorization.
  
2. Integrity:
   - Ensures that data remain accurate, reliable, and consistent.
  
3. Availability:
   - Ensures that data and resources are accessible and usable when needed.
  
### **AAA Framework:**
1. Authentication: Verirfies the identity of users atempting to access a systemor resources.
2. Authorization: What actions or operations are allowed to perform? Access level based on roles, permissions, or privilege.
3. Accounting: Tracking and recording activities within a system.

### **Vulnerability:**
- Weakness in systems, networks, or processes.
- Can be exploited by threats to compromise CIA.
- Exposes the organisation to threats.

### **Threat:**
- Any potential danger to information or systems.
- Malware, phishing, DoS.
- Takes advantage of vulnerability.

### **Risk:**
- Likelihood of a threat exploiting a vulnerability.
- Potential for loss and damage when a threat occurs.

### **Log:**
A record of events that have occured ithin a system.

### **Security Event:**
Any observable occurrence that has a potential significance for security.

### **Security Incidents:**
An occurrence that actually harms information or systems.

### **Alert:**
A notifiaction generated by security systems or personnels.

### **Security Contorls:**
1. Defense In-Depth: Strategy for layered security. It's multiple barriers to threats.
2. Administrative Controls: Security policies, Change management.
3. Technical Controls: Firewalls,EDR, 2FA.
4. Physical Contorls: Access control system, surveillance cameras, biometrics.

### **Security Control Functions:**
1. Preventative Control: Eliminate or reduce likelihood of an attack succeeding.
2. Detective Control: Identify and record attempted or successful intrusions.
3. Corrective Control: Eliminate or reduce the impact of an intrusion.
4. Deterrent Control: Discourages intrusion attampts.
5. Compensating Control: Acts as an alternative for a principal control.

### **Risk Control Strategies**
1. Risk Tranference: Shift responsibility to a third-party.
2. Risk Acceptance: Acknowledge and tolerate a risk.
3. Risk Avoidance: Proactively eliminate or avoid exposure to a risk.
4. Risk Mitigation: Reduce the likelihood or impact of a risk.

### **Security Policies**
These are documents that outline an organisation guidance, principles, and procedures for protecting its assets.
1. Acceptable Use Policy (AUP)
2. Password Policy
3. Data Classification Policy
4. Change Management Policy
5. Disaster Recovery Policy

### **Event Management**
The process of monitoring, analysing, and prioritising security events generated by various systems.
1. Collection, normalisation, analysis
2. Logs alerts, endpoints
3. Identify abnormal or suspicious activities
4. Secrurity Information and Event Management (SIEM)

### **Incident Management**
This is the process of detecting and responding to and resolving security incidents in a timely manner so that we can minimalise their impact.

### **Incident Management Lifecycles**
1. Incident Identification
2. Incident classification
3. Incident Investigation
4. Incident Containment
5. Incident Eradiaction
6. Incident Recovery

### **Detection Outcomes**
1. False Positive: Incorrectly identifies a normal activity as a security threat or incident.
2. True Positive: Correctly identifies a real security threat or an incident.
3. False Negative: Security tool faiked to detect real security threat.
4. True Positive: Correct identifiaction of normal activity.

### **SOC Metrics**
1. Meam Time to Detect (MTTD):
   - Lower MTTD = faster detection
  
2. Mean Time to Resolution (MTTR):
   - Lower MTTR = more efficient IR

3. Mean Time to Attend & Analyse (MTTA&A):
   - Lower MTTA&A - reduced response latency
  
4. Incident Detection Rate:
   - Higher rate = better visibilty and monitoring

5. False Positive Rates (FPR):
   - Lower rate = more accurate detection
  
6. False Negative Rates (FNR):
   - Lower rate = more accurate detection
  
7. Key Performance Indicator (KPIS):
   - Measurable values to track performance

8. Key Risk Indicators (KRIS):
   - Measurable values to assess risk.

9. Service Level Agreement (SLAs):
    - Agreement between the SOC and the SOC management.
  
### SOC Tools
1. ### Security Information and Event Management (SIEM):
   SIEM is a centralised platform for collecting, correlating, analysing, and managing security event data in reaal-time.

2. ### Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response (SOAR):
   - Orchestration: Workflow, collaboration
   - Automation: Alert triage, artefact collection, and data enrichment.
   - Incident Response: Assess and prioritize
   - Integration: TIPs, EDR,Firewall, etc.
   - Analytics and intelligence
   - Reporting

3. ### Incident Management Tools:
   - Incident Ticketing
   - Alert Management
   - Workflow Automation
   - Collaboration
  
4. ### Network Security Monitoring (NSM):
   - Packet capture and analysis
   - Network traffic analysis
   - Intrusion Detection
   - Integration with SIEM
  
5. ### IDS and IPS:
   - IDS: Designed to detect security incidents and generate alers based on their predefined criteria like known attack           signatures or anomalous behavious or different policy violations that we set up.
   - IPS: Used to prevent attacks and actually builds upon the capabilities of an IDS by actively blocking or preventing          detected threats in real-time.
     
6. ### Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR):
   EDR protects individual endpoint devices, like desktop, server, and mobile devices.
   - Examples: Crowdstrike, SentinelOne, Carbon Black.

7. ### Firewall:
   A network security tool designed to monitors and controlsincoming and outgoing network traffic based on prededfined          secueirty rules. Examples, CloudFlare, PFSense, etc.

8. ### Threat Intelligence Platforms (TIPs):
   - Data aggregation and enrichment.
   - Indication of compromise (IOCs).
   - Normalisation and standardisation.
   - Analysis and prioritisation
   - Examples: OpenCTI, MAltego, etc.
     
9. ### Forensic Analysis Tools:
   Tools designed to collect, analyse, and interpret digital evidence from computer systems or networks, or storage devices     for the purpose of forensic investigations. Examples: Autopsy, Volatility, etc.

10. ### Malware Analysis Tools:
    Tools designed to analyse and disect malwares. Examples: AnyRun, Chidra, etc.

### Common Threats and Attacks
1. Social Engineering: A form of attack that exploits the human side of cybersecurity rather than any kind of technical vulnerability.

Forms:
- Phishing
  - Spear phishing: targeted phishing.
  - Whaling: target high profile in an organisation
  - Vishing: voice phishing
  - Smishing: SMS phishing
  - Quishing: QR code phishing
 
2. Malware: Malicious software designed to expliot an organisation or individual.
   - Worm: Self-replicating malware
   - Spyware/Adware: Malwares designed to monitor users activity or display unwanted advertisements.
   - Trojan: Malware designed to disguise as a legitimate program.
   - Ransomware: Holds systems or files excrypted until ransom is paid.
   - Botnet: Network of compromises computers controlled by an attacker.

3. Identity and Account Compromise (identity theft):
   - Unauthorized access to someone's account

4. Insider Threats: Threats from someone within the organisation.

5. Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs): A highly skilled, well-funded adversaries.

6. Denial-of-Service Attacks: Disrupt the availability of systems.

7. Data Breaches: Unauthorised data exposure, theft, or compromise.

8. Zero-Day: Software vulnerability unknown to the vendor.

9. Supply Chain Attacks: Targeted software supply chain to compromised the security downstream to organisations or users.
